Re-collection: Art, New Media, and Social Memory. Richard Reinhart and John Ippolito. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA. 2014. 

//

1. The Lost and the Saved

Eva Hesse and Sol LeWitt, "both were harbingers of the new media art forms spawned by the digital age."

Hesse's _Expanded Expansion_ in constrast to LeWitt's _Wall Drawing 146_

_Expanded Expansion_ is an installation created by pouring latex over cheesecloth, "you could bunch it together like an accordion on a small wall or stretch it twenty-five feet wide for a longer one." "But gradually the resin darkended, the fabric stiffened, and eventually everything begin to deteriorate." "despite herioic efforts by museum convervators, all that may be left of these remnants of sculptural splendor one day is dust in an archival box."

"as we shall see, the track record for newer media is even worse than for Hesse's disintegrating polymers. Audiotapes demagnetize. CDs delaminate. Internet art links to websites that no longer exist."

_Wall Drawing 146_ is "generated by assistants following a predetermined set of instrucitons in their titles." "LeWitt was careful to make his instructions as universal as possible, so his drawings could adapt to new spaces..." "As a result, LeWitt wall drawings are routinely created, painted over, an recreated by various qualified assistants the world over, and have been for four decades. There's no sign that his works are going to disappear any time soon -- or to be more accurate, they disappear all the time, but always stand at the ready for their next reinarnation."

"In some ways, these two works are beyond the need for a novel preservation paradigm. We are too late to save the Hesse, since the artist died without leaving any solution to her work's failing health; and the LeWitt, which is based on repeating a fairly straightforward set of instructions, doesn't really need expert conservators to stay alive."

"Nevertheless... the vulnerabilities of digital media are propelling a vast swath of today's culture toward the same fate as that of _Expanded Expansion_ -- but at a rate acceleration ten- or a hundredfold. Movies and mp3s, installation art and interactive games -- all will be lost unless we uncover the underlying causes of today's cultural descrition before it's too late."

"Triple threat" to twenty-first-century creativity -- technology, institutions, and law

Rescue techniques:

STORAGE

"Storage captures matter and puts it in a box, on a shelf, under glass, in a climate-controlled vault deep in a mountain."

"Whearas storage is the longest-term strategy for old media, it is the shortest-term solution for new media."


EMULATION

"_Emulation_ means not storing digital files on disk or physical artifacts in the warehouse, but creating an audiovisual facsimile of them."

"For analog culture, emulation can be costly in time and money, for it may mean custom-fabricating material that once were mass-produced, such as light bulbs or candies." [ref. to Dan Flavin and Félix González-Torres]

"In digital culture, however, the technique of software emulation--whereby one computer impersonates another--is a powerful preservation tool."


MIGRATION

"Migration often seems more prosaic than emulation, because a migrated work sticks close to the medium of the original, imply upgrading its technology to the current industry standard."

"...migration can alter a work's look and feel, and the further a work is migrated away from its original medium, the greater the risk of its departing from the spirit of the original."


REINTERPRETATION

"Reinterpretation is the most radical of the four preservation strategies, though also the most powerful. A reinterpretation sacrifices basic aspects of the work's appearance in order to retain the original spirit. Rare for the visual arts, reinterpretation is common in dance the theater..."

"... a work of software art written in one language may be completely rewritten for a different platform..."


The paradigm for "fluidly creating and recreating works" is defined as "variable media"

"The variable media approach encourages creators to define a work in medium-independent terms so that it can be translated into a new medium once its original format is obsolete."

//

2. New Media and Social Memory

"Many efforts to preserve new art leap right to logistical problem solving. This is understandable given the urgency of the problem, but, in order to make the fundamental shirts necessary to solve the problem, we also need to understand the historical context an ideological assumptions that underlie the discourse and color our solutions."







